2025 Releases
=============

2025 brought breaking changes to across the LensKit APIs to improve ergonomics,
correctness-by-default, and flexibility.  It also adopts SPEC0_, a standard for
supported versions of scientific Python libraries, and changes the LensKit
version number scheme to “:ref:`SemCalver`”.  See :ref:`migrating` for
information on how to upgrade your code.

.. _SPEC0: https://scientific-python.org/specs/spec-0000/

.. _2025.6.0:

2025.6.0
~~~~~~~~

- Add and test support for Python 3.14.
- Adjust dependencies to allow PyArrow 22 (but not 21, due to miscompiled
  Windows wheels).
- Disabled parallel scoring in :class:`~lenskit.knn.ItemKNNScorer` to fix
  problems with nondeterministic results (:pr:`922`).
- Initial support for session-based recommendation, through additional methods
  on :class:`~lenskit.data.RecQuery` (:pr:`929`).  Item KNN and the ALS
  recommenders now support session-based recommendation as well.  The changes to
  support this also add support for related-item recommendation through “context
  items” in query. See :ref:`session-queries` for further information.

.. _2025.5.0:

2025.5.0
~~~~~~~~

- Documentation updates.
- Rename rank metric ``k`` arguments to ``n`` (with ``k`` as a deprecated alias).
- Rename ``MetricAccumulator`` to
  :class:`~lenskit.metrics.MeasurementCollector`, to reserve the “accumulator”
  name for other accumulation purposes.
- Add test coverage measurements for Rust accelerator code.

.. _2025.4.0:

2025.4.0
~~~~~~~~

Some small improvements.  See `milestone 2025.4`_ for details.

.. _milestone 2025.4: https://github.com/lenskit/lkpy/issues?q=state%3Aclosed%20milestone%3A%222025.4%22

.. _2025.3.2:

2025.3.2
~~~~~~~~

This is a small bug fix and minor improvement release.

- Improve ``__repr__`` for :class:`~lenskit.data.Dataset` and :class:`~lenskit.data.ItemList`.
- Fix rate limit in Jupyter progress bar (:pr:`876`).
- Modify the :meth:`~lenskit.data.MatrixRelationshipSet.scipy` and
  :meth:`~lenskit.data.MatrixRelationshipSet.torch` methods of
  :class:`lenskit.data.MatrixRelationshipSet` to filter out missing values of
  the selected attribute.
- Fixed :class:`~lenskit.config.common.EmbeddingSizeMixin`'s support for
  ``embedding_size_exp`` to correctly override ``embedding_size``.
- Added LIP and RBO functions.
- Bug fixes and refactors for FA*IR reranker.
- :ref:`FlexMF <flexmf>`: Fall back to uncompiled models when Dynamo fails (:pr:`883`).
- Internal refactors of some testing code.
- Update ``repr`` for :class:`~lenskit.dataset.Dataset` and
  :class:`~lenskit.dataset.ItemList` (:pr:`877`).
- Exclude missing attribute values from SciPy and PyTorch sparse matrix
  representations of matrix relationship attributes (:pr:`884`).  This fixes
  breakage in Biased MF and Bias in the face of incomplete attribute data.

.. _2025.3.1:

2025.3.1
~~~~~~~~

LensKit 2025.3.1 is a significant feature and bugfix upgrade to the LensKit 2025
series.  It maintains backwards compatibility with 2025.2 for stable interfaces
(see :ref:`stability-levels`), except as noted below.  See the `GitHub
milestone <https://github.com/lenskit/lkpy/milestone/18>`_ for a full list of
changes in this release; key changes are noted below.

Highlights
----------

-   Added Rust acceleration for several data processing operations and kNN
    models.
-   Added a new, experimental PyTorch matrix factorization model (see
    :ref:`flexmf`).
-   :mod:`lenskit.basic` now exports the configuration classes for basic algorithms (:pr:`672`).
-   The pipeline runner now supports :ref:`pipeline-hooks` to inspect or modify
    pipeline operations.
-   The pipeline runner type checking logic has been refactored and simplified.
    As a consequence, when ``None`` is provided to a component input that does
    not accept ``None``, the runner now raises :class:`TypeError` instead of
    :class:`PipelineError`, as this is a type error.  Details on a type error's
    input wiring are now provided as a note on the exception, instead of in the
    main exception message.
-   Pipelines can now be specified in configuration files, and used from the
    command line.
-   Datasets can now have repeated or duplicate interactions (although such
    data sets are typically slow, see :issue:`869`).
-   **Experimental** and mostly undocumented hyperparameter tuning support.
-   Added a configuration facility in :mod:`lenskit.config` to configure random
    numbers, power measurement, etc.  Scripts using LensKit should call
    :func:`lenskit.configure`.
-   Added support for querying power consumption from Prometheus.  Documentation
    on how to set this up to be useful is TBD.

Compatibility Changes
---------------------

.. important::
    These changes should not break most programs, but do introduce and document
    stricter requirements on certain names.

-   Pipeline component input names are not allowed to be prefixed with ``_``, as
    such names are reserved for LensKit internal operation.  This is not yet
    enforced, but will be enforced beginning in LensKit 2026.
-   Entity and attribute names are not allowed to be prefixed with ``_``, and
    attribute names cannot end with ``_id`` or ``_num``.

Component Changes
-----------------

-   :class:`~lenskit.knn.ItemKNNScorer` and :class:`~lenskit.knn.UserKNNScorer`
    are rewritten to use Rust acceleration, along with changes to its internal
    data representation to use Arrow instead of SciPy.  This also fixes a
    segfault with very large similarity matrices.

    .. note::

        The model parameters of the KNN scorers have changed.  They are no
        longer suffixed with ``_``, and the similarity matrix is a PyArrow list
        array.  Code that was directly examining internal elements will need to
        change.

-   The :mod:`lenskit.als` scorers have been similarly refactored, and had their
    learned parameters renamed for better consistency.

-   Replaced the broken :class:`~lenskit.basic.SoftmaxRanker` with a proper
    stochastic sampler (:pr:`667`,
    :class:`~lenskit.stochastic.StochasticTopNRanker`).  The old ranker will be
    removed in LensKit 2026.

-   Added :class:`lenskit.training.UsesTrainer` for more sophisticated iterative
    training support.

-   Added :meth:`lenskit.data.ItemList.top_n` to get the top-*N* values of an
    item list efficiently.

-   :class:`lenskit.data.Vocabulary` is now backed by a Rust hashtable instead of a
    Pandas ``Index``.  An index view is still available.

Data Handling
-------------

-   Added versioning to the native data format, documented data format
    compatibility, and added compatibility tests.
-   Added compressed sparse row extension types for Arrow, and use them in the
    LensKit native format (as well as Python/Rust data interchange) to more
    reliably handle CSR matrix data in Arrow (previously, we had to carry the
    matrix width or row dimension in side information; it is now embedded into
    the Arrow metadata).
-   Fix MovieLens import to detect movies without genres (:issue:`727`, :pr:`738`).
-   :ref:`parallelism` now supports comma-separated lists for configuring
    parallelism within worker processes, and :envvar:`LK_NUM_CHILD_THREADS` is
    now deprecated.
-   Added importers for UCSD Amazon data sets.

Evaluation
----------

-   Reworked the design of the :class:`~lenskit.metrics.Metric` interface, along
    with metric accumulation for run measurement, to facilitate more types of
    metrics and more flexible use of the evaluation facilities.  More breaking
    changes will come in LensKit 2026.

CLI
---

-   Added several new capabilities to the :ref:`LensKit CLI <cli>`.

Other Changes
-------------

-   :meth:`~lenskit.data.MatrixRelationshipSet.sample_negatives` now accepts
    ``"popular"`` as an alias for ``"popularity"``.
-   Several bug fixes for logging in niche setups (including ray clusters) (:pr:`673`).

.. _2025.2.0:

2025.2.0
~~~~~~~~

LensKit 2025.2.0 was released March 12, 2025.

Some small quality-of-life improvements (and removing invalid API compat).

-   Add :class:`lenskit.pipeline.PipelineCache` to share components between pipelines (:pr:`605`).

-   Only warn once for users without test data in bulk analysis (:pr:`664`, :issue:`663`).

-   Allow a Pandas data frame to be passed as the test data to the batch recommender (:pr:`660`).

    .. note::

        This removes extra keyword arguments from the convenience
        ``batch.recommend``, etc. functions that were leftovers from LensKit
        0.14 and no longder did anything.

-   Support auto-detecting keys in :meth:`lenskit.data.ItemListCollection.from_df` (:pr:`659`).


.. _2025.1:

2025.1.1
~~~~~~~~

LensKit 2025.1.1 was released March 7, 2025.

The changes in this release are too numerous and fundamental to fully document
in traditional release notes.  See the following for release update documentation:

- :ref:`migrating` for conceptual changes and how to upgrade your code.
- The notes below for *behavior* changes (e.g. new defaults, new metric
  capabilities), and small bits not covered in the migration guide.
- The full changelog in the `Git history
  <https://github.com/lenskit/lkpy/compare/0.14.4...main>`_ and `issue/PR
  milestone <https://github.com/lenskit/lkpy/milestone/14>`_.

Breaking Changes
----------------

LensKit 2025 has many breaking changes, with the migration guide
(:ref:`migrating`) documenting the major ones.  Below are some smaller ones not
covered by that document:

*   Where Pandas data frames are still used, the standard user and item columns
    have been renamed to ``user_id`` and ``item_id`` respectively, with
    ``user_num`` and ``item_num`` for 0-based user and item numbers.  This is to
    remove ambiguity about how users and items are being referenced.

*   The ``Popular`` recommender has been removed in favor of :class:`~lenskit.basic.PopScore`.

*   The DCG metric has been removed, as it is basically never used and was not
    useful as a part of the NDCG implementation.

New Features (incremental)
--------------------------

*   Many LensKit components (batch running, model training, etc.) now report
    progress the progress API in :mod:`lenskit.logging.progress`, and can be
    connected to Jupyter or Rich.
*   Added RBP top-N metric (:pr:`334`).
*   Added command-line tool to fetch datasets (:pr:`347`).

Metric Behavior Changes
-----------------------

.. important::

    Some LensKit metric default has been changed; this results in values
    different from those computed by previous versions, either more correct or
    more consistent with common practice.

*   The :class:`~lenskit.metrics.NDCG` metric now defaults to *ignore* rating
    values.

Model Behavior Changes
----------------------

Most models will exhibit some changes, hopefully mostly in performance, due to
moving to PyTorch.  There are some deliberate behavior changes in this new version,
however, documented here.

* ALS models only use Cholesky decomposition (previously selected with the
  erroneously-named ``method="lu"`` option); conjugate gradient and coordinate
  descent are no longer available.  Cholesky decomposition is faster on PyTorch
  than it was with Numba, and is easier to maintain.
* The default minimum similarity for :class:`~lenskit.algorithms.knn.UserUser`
  is now :math:`10^{-6}`.
* k-NN algorithms no longer support negative similarities; ``min_sim`` is
  clamped to be at least the smallest normal in 32-bit floating point
  (:math:`1.75 \times 10^{-38}`).
* The :mod:`implicit` bridge algorithms no longer look at rating values when
  they are present.
* Bias is no longer optional for :class:`~lenksit.als.BiasedMFScorer` and
  :class:`~lenskit.funksvd.FunkSVD`; both are inherently biased models, and
  FunkSVD is not commonly used.
* :class:`lenskit.hpf.HPF` no longer uses ratings as synthetic counts by
  default.

Bug Fixes
---------

* Fixed bug in NDCG list truncation (:issue:`309`, :pr:`312`).
* Corrected documentation errors for :py:func:`~lenskit.metrics.recall` and :py:func:`~lenskit.metrics.hit` (:pr:`369` by :user:`lukas-wegmeth`).

Dependencies and Maintenance
----------------------------

* Bumped minimum supported dependencies as per SPEC0_ (Python 3.11, NumPy 1.24, Pandas 2.0, SciPy 1.10).
* Added support for Pandas 2 (:pr:`364`) and Python 3.12.
* Improved Apple testing to include vanilla Python and Apple Silicon (:pr:`366`).
* Updated build environment, dependency setup, taskrunning, and CI to more consistent and maintainable.
* Removed legacy random code and SeedBank usage in favor of SPEC 7 (see :ref:`rng`).
* Code is now auto-formatted with Ruff.
