2026 Releases
=============

2026 builds on the foundation of :ref:`2025 <2025>` to improve the ergonomics of
data access, querying, and metrics, and clean up some APIs that seemed good at
the time, while making it even easier to use LensKit for recommendation
scenarios besides ID-based personalized recommendation.

There are no new major paradigm shifts, though — pipelines, datasets, and
components work as they do in the 2025 series, but with more features, some
rough corners polished off the interfaces, and hopefully fewer bugs.

.. _2026.1.0:

2026.1.0
~~~~~~~~

This is the first major feature and update release of the 2026 series!  Key
highlights:

- The :class:`~lenskit.training.Trainable` protocol now has a method to query
  whether a model has been trained, instead of relying on every trainable to
  correctly implement skip-on-retrain logic.
- Batch inference inputs are simplified and more explicit.
- Cleanup of several deprecated interfaces, and simplifying the public module
  hierarchy.
- Dependency updates with SPEC0.
- FlexMF is nearing stability, and will be stabilized in an upcoming 2026.x
  point release.  It also supports LightGCN.
- Updated default embedding sizes to a power of 2 (64) throughout LensKit.
- Improved metric interface to better support complex metric aggregations. Some
  automatic aggregation and analysis is no longer supported or will soon be
  removed (:class:`~lenskit.metrics.RunAnalysis` is deprecated), in favor of
  clear metric collection within a single run and letting the user aggregate
  and summarize in whatever tool they prefer.

Additional changes are described here. See the `milestone
<https://github.com/lenskit/lkpy/milestone/19>`_ `GitHub release
<https://github.com/lenskit/lkpy/releases/tag/v2026.1.0>`_ for further
change-level details.

Breaking Changes
----------------

Major Breaking Changes
......................

These are the major changes that will affect users who are writing code to
generate recommendations with LensKit, or implementing recommendation
components.

- Many submodules (such as most modules under :mod:`lenskit.pipeline`) have been
  renamed to be private modules.  Code importing from their original locations
  will need to be updated to import from the higher-level module (:issue:`947`).

- The :class:`~lenskit.training.Trainable` protocol now has a separate method
  :meth:`~lenskit.training.Trainable.is_trained` to query if a component has
  been trained, and responsibility for skipping retraining of already-trained
  components when :attr:`~lenskit.training.TrainingOptions.retrain` is ``False``
  has been moved from individual components to
  :meth:`lenskit.pipeline.Pipeline.train` (:issue:`1042`, :pr:`1044`).
  Components that implement :class:`~lenskit.training.Trainable` need to
  implement the new method as well.

  The pipeline builder will issue a warning if a component implements
  :meth:`~lenskit.training.Trainable.train` but not
  :meth:`~lenskit.training.Trainable.is_trained`.

- Default embedding sizes for all embedding-based models (matrix factorizers,
  etc.) have changed to be 64 instead of 50, with the exception of
  :mod:`lenskit.implicit`, which continues to default to Implicit's defaults
  (:issue:`846`).

- :class:`~lenskit.metrics.RunAnalysis` is deprecated, and no longer supports
  explicit defaults or global metrics.  Use
  :class:`~lenskit.metrics.MeasurementCollector` instead.  Its global metric
  columns have also changed in some cases.

- LensKit now requires Python 3.12.5 or newer, along with NumPy 2.x, Pandas 2.3
  or newer, and SciPy 1.13 or newer (see :ref:`dep-policy`, :pr:`954`).  Earlier
  versions of Python 3.12 have a bug in the standard library that affects
  LensKit.

- Stopped providing wheels for macOS on Intel.  Users who still need to run
  LensKit on Intel-based Macs should use the Conda packages (available in
  conda-forge and `prefix.dev`_).

- Removed the deprecated unrated and all-items candidate selectors, in favor of
  :class:`~lenskit.basic.TrainingItemsCandidateSelector` (:issue:`935`).

- Several input types to batch inference are no longer supported, to reduce
  ambiguity and implicit behavior (:issue:`958`, :pr:`1074`).

Other Breaking Changes
......................

These changes are more minor, and won't directly affect most users who are using
LensKit components and metrics as-is.

- Pipeline components and inputs now have restrictions on their names, and cannot
  have names beginning with ``_``.  See :ref:`pipeline-names` for details.
- Pipeline configurations serialized with previous versions **cannot** be
  re-loaded in LensKit 2026, due to moves of module paths.  Import path
  canonicalization (:issue:`948`) reduces the risk of such breakage in future
  releases.  Handwritten configurations will often still work.
- The ``AttributeSet`` class has been renamed to
  :class:`~lenskit.data.EntityAttribute` (:issue:`946`), to better clarify its
  design and role.
- We no longer publish 32-bit binary wheels.
- Removed ``DecomposedMetric``, as the :class:`~lenskit.metrics.Metric` interface
  is now decomposed. All metrics based on listwise measurements or intermediate
  results should directly extend from ``Metric`` or :class:`~lenskit.metrics.ListMetric`.
  (:pr:`983`)
- ``GlobalMetric`` has been removed. Code needing to compute global metrics
  should directly compute over item lists.
- :class:`~lenskit.metrics.MeasurementCollector` no longer supports defaults
  when adding metrics.
- :class:`~lenskit.metrics.ListGini` and :class:`~lenskit.metrics.ExposureGini`
  now require an item vocabulary or dataset as input.
- Removed the deprecated ``lenskit.training.IterativeTraining`` base class in
  favor of :class:`lenskit.training.UsesTrainer`.
- Component class members have been renamed to no longer use the Scikit-Learn
  pattern of trailing ``_`` in their names.
- Removed the ``lenskit.stats.argtopn`` function (:issue:`833`).
  :meth:`lenskit.data.ItemList.top_n` now uses a Rust-accelerated top-*N*
  implementation (:pr:`1049`).
- :meth:`lenskit.data.ItemList.to_arrow` no longer accepts mappings for its
  optional ``columns`` argument, sequences of names are used instead
  (:pr:`1052`).
- Removed the ``n`` option to :func:`~lenskit.pipeline.predict_pipeline`
  (:issue:`835`).
- Revised :class:`~lenskit.data.RecQuery` to only accept keyword arguments, and
  removed the legacy ``user_items`` attribute.

.. _prefix.dev: https://prefix.dev/channels/lenskit/

New Features
------------

- Added environment variables to :class:`~lenskit.training.TrainingOptions`, along with the
  :meth:`~lenskit.training.TrainingOptions.env_var` method to query them.  This allows for
  open-ended configuration of training processes.
- Added support for free-threaded Python, including binary distributions for
  Python 3.14t on Linux and macOS (:issue:`916`, :pr:`1022`).
- Added support for parallel batch inference using thread pools on free-threaded
  Python (:issue:`921`, :pr:`1025`).
- Added LightGCN support to FlexMF (:issue:`1019`, :pr:`1033`).
- Added SLIM and fsSLIM to :mod:`lenskit.knn` (:issue:`894`, :pr:`896`).

Performance Changes
-------------------

- :meth:`lenskit.data.RelationshipSet.co_occurrances` is much faster and uses
  parallel computation, at the expense of increased memory use in the symmetric
  (non-ordered) case (:issue:`970`, :pr:`1007`).

Minor Changes
-------------

- :func:`lenskit.metrics.call_metric` has been renamed to
  :func:`~lenskit.metrics.measure_list`, and the old name preserved as a
  deprecated alias.
- Pipeline type-checking for `ArrayLike` component inputs no longer works, due to
  a breaking change in NumPy 2.4.  No LensKit components used `ArrayLike` as an
  input or output data type.
- Pipeline component inputs with default values can now have missing inputs
  (:issue:`1000`, :pr:`1001`).
- Rust progress updates now use a background thread to simplify logic and keep
  locks out of the work path (:pr:`1008`).
- Fixed a bug saving item list collections of emtpy item lists to Parquet files
  (:issue:`1051`, :pr:`1052`).
